Previous/)4”
If it wasna for Mac Dubh,
I would no be setting foot
on that bucket of shite.
Jamie.
Ian!
What do you do with the boys?
Oh, I have my way with them.
Virgins have such power inside.
We have a responsibility
to change history.
No!
This is God's will!
We must return to the ship.
Make ready to sail.
Claire!
You must be from the ship,
or what's left of it.
Any survivors?
Aye, four miles south of here.
You're on the mainland.
America.
For centuries, humans have held
an endless fasahat/on with circles,
attr/but/ng meaning
where they are found.
From the eternal rotation
of the planets around the sun,
to the movement of clock hands,
to a simple wedding band.
And 1; more than most; know full well
just how a circle can affect one’s life.
0r death.
Ripley!
Would you allow me a moment
to bid farewell to my friend?
Hayes.
When they set you free near the gallows,
Fergus will create a stramash.
and then you run as though
the devil himself is chasing you.
Ye're aff yer heid, Mac Dubh.
Do you intend to be hanged as well?
I canna let ye die.
You came on this journey to aid us.
Aye.
And I dinna regret it.
I shoulda listened to you, Mac Dubh.
I shouldna lain with that woman.
Men do things drunk
they wouldna when clear-headed.
I didna ken she was married
till the husband came upon me
with a pitchfork.
Kicked him down the stairs
only to save my own neck.
Now it's with my neck that I'll pay.
There's two things you might grant me.
Anything.
First, whisky.
With any luck,
I'll hardly notice
when the rope tightens.
A whisky's hard to come by hereabouts,
but I do have a wee bit of rum.
I can always count on ye.
To my soul.
How about a drop
for my soul as well?
To all our souls.
Slinte.
What was your second request?
I'd like the last face I look upon
to be that of a friend.
Smiling at me.
You have my word.
When they release Hayes, do nothing.
You have another plan, Milord?
No.
This is the way Hayes wants it.
It had been four months
s/nce we arr/ved /n Amer/ca.
We’d been making our way up
the coast when our friend Gavin Hayes,
lr/l/ed a man and was sentenced to death.
Jamie tried everything he could
to save Hayes,
but the magistrate wou/dn ’t listen.
Stop.
Keep it going.
Move.
The said, Gavin Hayes,
feloniously and wilfully
did kill and murder
against His Majesty's peace,
his crown, and dignity.
Next.
No, no! Stupid guards!
You let him die! Hayes!
It's not... It's not right!
They canna take him from me!
I'm sorry! Hayes!
Move it, boy.
Out of the way.
He's getting away!
Halt or I'll fire!
Quickly, after him!
Sing me a song
Of a lass that is gone
Say, could that lass
Be 1'?
Merry of soul
She sa/led on a day
Over the sea
7'0 Skye
[Wow and breeze
Islands and seas
Mountains of rain and sun
All that was good
All that was fair
All that was me
Is gone
Sing me a song
Of a lass that is gone
Say, could that lass
Be 1'?
Merry of soul
She sa/led on a day
Over the sea
7'0 Skye
I spoke with the harbourmaster.
The .
Campagn/a
sets sail
for home in three weeks,
allowing us time to visit
my Aunt Jocasta at River Run.
Fergus?
Did you speak with the minister?
Thieving wretch.
_ He will not have
a conVIcted felon In his graveyard.
Not without a good deal
of recompense for his sins.
An immoral wretch as well.
He's Willing to take a bribe.
Did you bring Hayes?
Aye. He's in our wagon.
We could bury him in the wood.
No.
No, Gavin wouldna care
for being alone in the woods.
He was mortally scairt of spirits.
D'ye recall, Mac Dubh, at Ardsmuir,
how he told us
of the
tannasg
he encountered?
We'll not lay him
in unconsecrated ground.
We'll lay him to rest tonight
in the company of other souls.
It's a good idea.
I'm very tired.
Might I take her up to her room to rest?
Aye. Aye, we'll manage without ye.
A man such as Hayes should
ne'er have met wi' such an end.
Without so much as _
a proper lament sung for him.
Well, he shall have a
caithns.
And so,
we were off to bury our friend.
Sad/y, Hayes would never
return home to Scotland.
And the only way the rest
of us would make it back
was to sell a gemstone we salvaged
from the wreck of the
Artemis.
Lillington's dinner
certainly seems promising.
And perhaps, we'll be able
to find a buyer for the gemstones there.
Aye, the gems will fetch
a bonny price.
Here'll do, lads.
Lesley, stay here with Claire.
Watch over Hayes.
Ian and I will find a good place.
Won't you need a headstone?
Surely they'll notice a newly-dug grave.
Aye, they might.
I shouldn't think the minister
would trouble himself
to dig him up for nothing.
What do you do with the boys?
I have my way with them.
All right, lad?
Ian.
What's the matter?
And after that. . .
The Bakra.
I’ve no use for them.
Ian, Ian!
Ian. Ian, what is it?
I didna want to summon the memories.
But the grave...
It reminds me.
Some ghosts can only be banished
by speaking their name
and foul deeds aloud.
I, too, had a festering pain inside.
Until I shared it with your Aunt Claire.
When I was taken
to the woman you called Geillis...
she was naked...
in a basin of blood.
She talked about bedding virgins,
as plain as though she asked me
whether I had parritch for breakfast.
I spoke true
and I told her I wasna chaste.
That answer was not to her liking.
She needed someone chaste
for her purposes.
She took my hand, and upon my life,
she made me come to bed and lie down.
She made me do things.
Unspeakable things.
Have you ever lain wi' someone
when ye didna want to do it?
I have.
Then ye understand how it can be?
How you can do it
without wishing to,
detesting it.
And all the while, it feels...
Pleasing?
Well, lad...
What it comes down to...
What it comes down to is that your cock
doesn't have a conscience, but you have.
It's not your fault, lad.
Ye did what ye must and survived.
That's all that matters.
Well, that hole is deep enough.
So...
Let's bring Hayes along then, huh?
Lesley, let's get on with it.
Gathering I ken
what another fellow needs.
Life without him doesna seem right.
- Christ alive!
- Where did it come from?
From Hell.
May it return there at once!
Not from Hell. From the gallows.
My apologies
for frightening ye.
Come.
All right, all right.
How long were you in the wagon?
Since midovernoon.
I crawled up there
once the frog loaded up poor old Hayes.
I was keeping him company,
hopin' that you'd be leaving town
and takin' me with you.
Stephen Bonnet, sir.
- Mr Bonnet.
-Hmm?
For what crime were you condemned?
Thieving, smuggling, piracy.
And how many men have you killed
in commission of your crimes,
Mr Bonnet?
None that were not tryin'
to kill me first.
Same as your friend.
All right.
You can go.
I'll not hinder ye.
Might I trouble you for conveyance?
There'll be watchm_en and soldiers
out on the road tonight hunting me.
to a creek with an outlet
down to the sea.
From there, you'll be on your way,
free of the taint of my company.
I won't bother you again.
You have my word.
I'm begging you, sir.
In the name of Gavin Hayes.
He said you'd never turn
your back on a friend.
For a friend of Gavin?
All right.
We'll take ye.
Great.
I'll go with you.
_ Husband and wife
Will seem less SUSplCIOUS.
Fine.
First, we lay Hayes to rest.
After we're done,
you two take the horses.
Return to the tavern.
We'll deliver Mr Bonnet to safety.
Thank you.
I'd only ask one more thing.
Well, that you allow me
to help bury a friend.
Halt. Make yourselves known.
James Fraser and my wife, Claire Fraser.
What is it that brings you out
so perilously late?
A family matter.
What have you in the wagon?
Nothing of worth.
What little we have
for our own prOVI5ion.
A cut of venison, sack of oats.
And a body.
- A what?
- A corpse.
One of the men
what was hanged this afternoon.
We're taking him
for a proper burial with his kinsman.
Have a look, Griswold.
Yes, sir. It's a body.
Wrapped in a shroud.
Take your bayonet and make sure
it's good and dead inside there.
That's sacrilegious, Sergeant.
Would you defile a body, sir?
Get on with it.
Stab it in the leg, Griswold,
to be sure.
Yeah, not a twitch. Dead as a doornail.
Be on your way, then,
Mr Fraser.
Whoa.
Are you wounded, Mr Bonnet?
Danu, the luck giver, was with me.
I think the venison
bore the brunt of it.
They pinked me
in the thigh a bit, though.
Well, let my wife tend to your leg.
She's a healer.
Here, let me look.
It's not bad.
Two wedding bands you wear.
I've been married twice.
Two lucky men, then.
And you've never parted
with the ring from the first?
No.
I never married.
But I've always been partial to rings.
The watchmen dispossessed me of mine.
There's something
about the notion of an infinite circle
that fascinates me.
Oh.
The hangman's noose is a circle
you'd do well to avoid in the future.
It's not the noose I fear, madam.
No?
Since I was a lad,
I've been plagued by... nightmares
of drowning over and over again.
You'd think I'd foresee it and waken.
But I never do.
Not till the water's over my head.
I know it'll be the death of me.
Gray waters, dark with mud,
things swimmin' blindly in it.
Waiting for the sea
to have her way with me.
That they might do the same
when she's done.
Well, nightmares can't harm you.
Uh, no.
It's the sea herself pullin' at me.
Have you ever felt
the sea pullin' at you?
I almost drowned once.
In a storm at sea.
Then you know what I speak of.
Where will you go from here, Mr Bonnet?
Oh, some of my associates
intended to weigh anchor
in a nearby tributary
before the weather turns.
I pray I'm not too late.
Why is it I get a feeling
'tis pirates that ye speak of?
Well, certainly the governors
of the Carolinas would call them so.
The merchants of Wilmington
would regard them otherwise.
No doubt you'll be seeking some reward
for your assistance?
That can be settled.
I saved ye for Hayes' sake.
I'll no' seek reward for such service.
Well, thank you, sir.
You truly are a rare gentleman indeed.
I might advise you to be wary.
Travellers in these woods,
they're often set upon
by thieves and outlaws.
We will.
Thank you.
I must bid you now
adieu.
I hope your good luck continues,
Mr Bonnet.
I found that a man
most often makes his own luck.
I fear we may rouse suspicion
if we pass by the Redcoats so soon.
Hate to deprive you of a warm bed,
but we'll have to stay
in the woods tonight.
I don't mind.
Nor do I.
Let's find a safe place to camp.
It's been such a terrible day.
I feel so luclq to be here with you.
It isn't wrong to be alive, Sassenach.
You're right.
We have to treasure these moments.
Aye.
You and I ken better than most
how fleeting life can be.
Hmm.
Still, can't help but feel sometimes
that all of this could be ripped away
at any moment.
It doesn't matter, Sassenach.
Don't you see
how small a thing death is between us?
After you left me, after Culloden,
I was dead.
Yet all that time I loved you.
I loved you too.
I never stopped.
When my body dies,
my soul will still be yours.
Nothing is lost, Sassenach.
Only changed.
That's the first law of thermodynamics.
No.
That's faith.
I don't care what it is.
I want to feel alive with you right now.
Do you know what lies
beyond those trees?
Aye.
More trees.
Yes, a lot more.
They stretch all the way past
a mighty river named the Mississippi
to the Great Plains.
This is just the start
of what America will become.
Eventually, it will reach
all the way to the Pacific Ocean.
North Carolina will just be
one of 50 states.
Hmm.
A|| filled with Scots.
There will be lots
of different people here
from countries all over the world.
And all hoping to live
what will be called the American dream.
Is that the same as our dream?
I suppose it is.
A chance to live in a place
where the only limitations
are a person's own abilities
and the will to succeed.
They'll come here in their thousands.
And then millions.
What about those already here?
The natives.
What becomes of them?
Well...
They are driven
from their ancestral lands.
They're killed.
Or forced to live in reservations.
It's not unlike
what the English did to the Highlanders.
A dream for some
can be a nightmare for others.
I suggested to Jamie
we try and sell the ruby.
As we got ready
for the I/l/ington dinner that night;
our hopes were h/gh
that we’d find a buyer.
It's not too much mutton
dressed as lamb, is it?
Neven
Only thing missing...
is a wee bit of jewellery.
Took it to the goldsmith.
Used some of our coin
to fashion this mount.
Only had time
for any but the simplest design.
- No, simple is best.
-Hmm.
Heard Governor Tryon will be
in attendance,
along with a Baron Penzler.
It's said the Baron's love of money
is accompanied by a love
of the fine objects that come with it.
Well, let's hope
he's a fondness for rubies.
Hmm.
Might I request the pleasure
of your company for dinner?
Madam?
You may.
Governor, Mrs Lillington and I
are so pleased...
Four shillings poll tax...
And four pence per gallon rum duty.
Will it never end?
That's the very least of it, Stanhope.
It's the never-ending expenses
incurred in dividing our land
from that of the Cherokee savages
which worries me.
- All from our taxes. _
- Yes, that's a good question.
It beggars belief,
does it not, Mistress Fraser?
Hmm, though I doubt many women
_ will be familiar
With such prOVInCIal matters.
Well, on the contrary,
Lord Penzler.
I'm sure the very thought
of inequitable taxes
brings out the savage in all of us.
I'm particularly savage
when it comes to taxes
that bear disproportionately
on the poor.
Yes, that's very good.
The savage in all of us.
Yes, indeed.
You must try not to be so amusing,
Mistress Fraser.
It may be the death of poor Stanhope.
Is this the style in Edinburgh,
Mistress Fraser?
How charming.
Such a beautiful stone.
You will permit me to look more closely?
Certainly.
Thank you.
Beautiful.
And without flaw.
The Governor and I have heard
that you are the nephew
of the Widow Cameron of River Run.
Have we been informed correctly,
Mr Fraser?
Aye, Jocasta Cameron is
my late mother's sister.
Either of you acquainted with her?
Yes, I've been acquainted
with Mistress Cameron
for many years. A most charming woman.
Are you familiar with her estate,
Your Excellency?
Hmm, my wife and I passed several days
at Cross Creek last year
during our tour of North Carolina.
River Run, I believe,
is situated on the Cape Fear River
at the foot of the mountains.
Aye.
You know, my family are Highlanders.
Mountains are like home to us.
Well, the Blue Ridge Mountains
are some of the most majestic
you'll see anywhere, Mr Fraser.
Hmm. I intend on seeing them
when I visit my aunt
before returning to Scotland.
Hmm.
Would you join me after dinner
for a pipe and some brandy?
I have a case imported from France.
There's a matter I wish
to put before you.
Mr Lillington tells me
you've been both a farmer and a soldier
and are newly arrived to the Colonies.
Are you familiar with conditions here?
To which conditions
might you refer, sir?
North Carolina, though not
as prosperous as its neighbours,
still offers wealth and prosperity
for those Willing
to persevere and work the land.
The Crown encourages settlement
by industrious, God-fearing families.
His Majesty is wise
to encourage settlement of lands
so rich in opportunity, Your Excellency.
To this end, there is established
a system of land grants
whereby large acreage
may be given to men
who would undertake
to persuade numbers of emigrants
to come and settle on part of it
under their sponsorship.
I did hear mention
of such grants, yet...
Yet is it not true they come
with a steep quitrent per acre
that must be paid in coin?
That is true.
But in frankness, Mr Fraser,
there is the law,
and there is What is done.
It may be possible to dispense
with the requirements
of quitrents
While one acquires settlers.
Provided, of course,
one swears an oath of loyalty
to His Majesty the King,
if not already done so.
And so, not Wishing
to remind you of any past indignity,
it is my duty to ask--
And mine to answer.
I'm a pardoned Jacobite.
I've sworn the oath.
Like so many others that paid
that price to keep their lives.
It's late, Your Excellency.
I must beg to take my leave of you.
Well, good night, Mr Fraser.
Um...
Do consider my offer.
A hundred pounds sterling.
For a single ruby, all thanks to you.
The Baron nearly dropped his eyeballs
into your bosom, the filthy lech.
Had a right mind
to challenge him over it.
Discretion is the better part of valour,
though I've yet to meet a Scot
who seemed to think so.
Hmm.
Be that as it may,
the Baron's eye for fine gemstones
means we've enough money
to secure passage
to Scotland many times over.
With What's left over, I can...
I can purchase a printing press.
You can practice your healing.
Dinna fash, Sassenach. It'll be fine.
John Grey used his influence
to Withdraw the warrant.
I'm no longer a wanted man.
- It's not that.
- You're a terrible liar.
- No, it's nothing.
- Ha.
Thinking so loudly,
I can hear ye from here.
Well, I was thinking about the offer
the Governor made to you.
Aye.
I was thinking on the matter myself.
And?
Huh.
Oh, he's no' offering me land
for the sake of my bonny blue eyes.
Bees that have honey in their mouth
have a sting in their tail.
Ask yourself this.
Why me?
_ _ An outsider _
With few ties and no known loyalties.
Except to the man that's offering you
a large tract of land.
Hmm.
The man's a soldier. A man of strategy.
He kens me as one.
And I understand he's had trouble
with the Regulators
a year past.
Who are the Regulators?
They're men from the Wilderness.
They've taken offence
at What they believe
is illegal behaviour on the part
of Tryon's tax collectors.
So they've taken matters
into their own hands.
They've called meetings,
drawn up petitions,
stirred up a spirit of resistance.
The Governor's clearly worried.
So, if things heat up,
he wants to buy
the loyalty and obligation
of an experienced soldier,
all for the cost of a few acres
of the King's land. Hmm.
He's much sneakier than I thought.
He's practically Scottish.
No.
Oh, Jamie, you have to remember
there's going to be
another war in eight years.
The American Revolution.
If you accepted the Governor's
offer of the land,
he'd expect you to fight for the Crown
against the revolutionaries.
I've fought in wars before, Sassenach.
Yes, but unlike Culloden,
this one the British Will lose.
We would be
on the wrong side of history again.
We would be branded as loyalists,
and the land the Governor
has offered you
would be taken from us.
This becomes Brianna's country,
does it not?
Yes, she was born here.
I dinna Wish to fight in wars again...
or have you in danger, Sassenach,
but if there's a bit I can do
to make this a good land
for Brianna...
If my presence here now
can be felt by her later, then...
Then that would be something.
Yes, it would.
Ian? Ian, where have you been?
And what's this beast you have With you?
Isn't he a handsome dog, Uncle?
Don't think that's a dog, Ian.
More like a bloody wolf.
Broader through the head
and chest than a wolf.
He's a fine creature.
Where'd you get him?
I won him.
Luclq roll of the dice.
So I called him Rollo.
Ye were dicin'?
Aye, with sailors.
But he's not the only thing I won.
Christ, ye shouldn't stake yer life
gambling with sailors.
But you're always at it, Uncle.
Every tavern we've seen fit to rest,
you've wagered our coin.
That's cards, not dice.
And I ken What I'm doing.
Well, I won, did I no'?
We have need of the money
for the journey home.
Aye, well,
if your mother hears of this...
I won't do it again. Promise.
You're right, you won't.
And you won't need to.
We've plenty of money now.
We found a buyer
for the ruby last night.
Well, that's some good news, Auntie.
Aye, well, bring your mongrel
and we'll go inside.
We'll have some food.
Then there's some things
we need to talk about.
Come on, Rollo.
Staying in America?
Aye.
Aye, Claire and I have decided
to try and make a life here.
That's a fine idea.
- We could stay--
- Not we, lad.
Ye'll still be on a ship
bound for Scotland.
Oh, please, Uncle.
I'll not be a worry to ye.
Truly, I swear it.
I'll work to earn my bread.
I've a talent for selling.
Fergus will tell ye.
Ye ken I would like nothing more
than to have ye with me,
but in What God's name
would your mother say?
Oh, I dinna ken.
But she'll be saying it in Scotland,
won't she?
She kens I'm safe with ye.
Ye wrote to her back in Georgia.
I canna say
that particular bit of knowledge
will be over-comforting to her, Ian.
Your parents dinna want
a vagrant's life for you, lad.
They want you to grow to be
a man of learning and influence.
A man of worth.
You'll amount to something
for yer mother's sake.
If it kills us both.
Yer life's no meant
to be wasted.
Where will you settle?
We thought we would work that out
when we're visiting River Run.
Mmm.
Fergus, I want ye to have
a portion of the profit from the ruby.
It will pay for ye and Marsali to return
to Scotland, if that's What you choose.
And there's a bit
for Marsali to take home to her mother.
For the alimony I promised.
There's enough for you as well, Lesley.
I appreciate it, Mac Dubh.
But I'd have ye keep your coin
if I may travel with ye a bit longer.
This is a Wild country,
and... my place is at your side.
Aye, ye may.
We would like to stay
in North Carolina as well, Milord.
Marsali would not be well-suited
to a long journey.
She is with child.
What?
Well, it certainly is a happy surprise.
Aye, was a surprise
to us as well.
Of course, we are delighted.
May God bless you both.
For now,
Marsali and I will stay in Wilmington.
It's a wee bit bigger than Broch Mordha.
I hope to find work as a seamstress,
While Fergus seeks employment himself.
Aye, you'll do fine, Marsali.
And you, you'll make a fine father.
Thank you, Milord.
Campagnia
leaves in under a fortnight.
You two will accompany us
to River Run until then.
- Congratulations. Great news.
- Thanks.
So, What is your Aunt Jocasta like?
She's a MacKenzie.
Hmm.
She's my mother's sister.
And I haven't seen her
Since I was a wee lad.
She wed a John Cameron and left Leoch
before my parents married.
She's never visited Lallybroch?
Aye, once or twice.
Then, John died of a flux,
so she wed his cousin, Hugh Cameron.
Well, he was killed hunting.
So, then she wed Hector Cameron.
Well, she seems to have quite
the taste for Camerons.
Hmm.
Is there something special
about them as a clan?
Outside from being accident-prone.
Well, they have a way wi' words.
Camerons are poets and jesters.
So which is Hector? A poet or a jester?
Neither.
He's dead now, too.
So, how did they come
to be in North Carolina?
Well, after the Rising, he and Jocasta
fled Scotland and came here.
He was granted land, built a house
and a saw mill, planted tobacco.
And then he died
of a morbid sore throat a year past.
Well, I hope the messenger arrives
with your letter before we do.
He'd arrive before we do
if he crawled on his hands and knees.
Well, keep going, lad.
I expect ye'll have us
in River Run before nightfall.
POOl' man deserves a rest.
Shouldn't have elderly slaves
on their feet all day.
Needn't worry yourself, madam.
He earns a fair wage for his work.
Isn't that right, Eutroclus?
Yes, I do, Captain.
You mean to say that you're free?
Yes, madam.
He used to be my slave.
Till one day I fell asleep
with the lamp still burning.
The cabin caught fire
and Troklus pulled me out in time.
After that,
I petitioned a court for his release
on the grounds of meritorious service
and offered a surety for his freedom.
Been working for me ever since.
Best waterman on the river.
You must be grateful
every day for What he's done for you.
Keep your eye up river.
You'll want to steer around any logs.
All right, lad.
It's your turn at the pole.
This is harder than it looks.
The current is stronger than I imagined.
Will you join me, Sassenach?
Of course.
Well, What's this?
A present.
Open it.
Do ye like it?
Oh, Jamie.
It's wonderful.
Where did you find it?
I saw the box when I--
When I went to the goldsmith
to have the ruby set.
Oh, my God.
It's a microscope.
Aye.
And, perhaps, one day,
I'll deck ye in laces and jewels.
I havena been able to give ye much ever,
save for this wee ring.
And my mother's pearls.
You've given me so much more.
Brianna, for one.
I gave the pearls to her.
They're an heirloom, after all.
And this ring is all I need.
Twenty-four years ago
I married ye, Sassenach.
I hope I haven't ever
given you cause to regret it.
Not for a single day.
Mr and Mrs Fraser,
pleasure to see you again.
Stay here, Claire.
Come on, Claire.
We've got to go. Come on.
Oh!
Ian!
Get out of here!
Who more than self their country loved
And mercy more than life
America, America
May God thy gold refine
777/ all success
Be nob/eness
And every gain divine
And you know, when I was in school
We used to sing it something l/ke this
Listen here
0 beautiful for spacious skies
For amber waves of grain
For purple mountain majesties
Above the fruited plain
Well, now wait a minute
I ’m talking about America
Sweet America
You know
God done shed his grace on thee
He crowned thy good
Yes, he did
And in brotherhood
From sea to sh/n/ng sea
You ought to love Him for it
He crowned thy good
He told me He would
And in brotherhood
From sea to sh/n/ng sea
0 Lord; 0 Lord!
I thank you, Lord
Shin/ng sea